Pitchfork: Faustian Echoes is connected to Goethe's Faust. How closely aligned is his text to the EP? What's the narrative here? And did you add your own story elements to it?

John Haughm: The "lyrics" are taken directly from an English translation of Goethe's Faust. We used select phrases and film samples to create the narrative which, together, outlines the backbone of the original story.

Pitchfork: It's a single, two-part song. What inspired that form? It's the longest song you've written. It beats out "Black Lake Nidstång".

Don Anderson: I think all bands have their own innate sense of time when it comes to writing. An average length song for Agalloch is around 10 minutes. I think long songs allow more room for the listener to reflect on what they're hearing. The mind has more space to wander in a long song-- with different passages-- than in a song that has a very strict verse-chorus-verse-chorus structure, where it's easy to predict what comes next and so you are always anticipating, rather than reflecting, on what the song is really doing. We tend to think about arrangements on a greater scale. A song like "Not Unlike the Waves", for example, has traditional verses/choruses, but is nonetheless nearly 10 minutes. I've always loved long songs and if I found a band that had a song that was even seven minutes in length, that was as much of a reason to buy their album as the cool artwork.

Pitchfork: The Faust legend, and Goethe's version, is something that's been used a number of times in music-- from operas, to classical scores, to Eminem and Tenacious D. How did you go about bringing something unique to it? Did you think about this larger history when writing "Faustian Echoes"?

JH: It's interesting how we ended up using this subject matter to begin with. It basically forced its way into the track. Initially, I had a six-minute piece of soundscape material that Steven (Wray Lobdell of the band Faust) had made for us during the Marrow of the Spirit sessions. I thought we would eventually release it as a B-side or something, and I decided to call it "Faustian Echoes" as a direct reference to the Faust that Steve was a member of. I think it works incredibly well with the film samples. Then last year on our way back from Israel, we were sitting in the Goethe Bar, inside the Frankfurt airport, discussing the idea of recording an EP. There was never an original intention to make a conceptual EP; it simply became one through a series of coincidences. Once I realized this and decided to pursue the Faust story; the song, the artwork...everything fell into place. We wrote the entire song in a month and recorded it in a weekend. Everything happened very quickly, as if almost by force of fate.

Pitchfork: Where do the samples come from?

JH: Jan Svankmajer's Faust. One of my favorites.

__Pitchfork: How'd you decide to release the EP on your label, Dämmerung Arts?
__

DA: I think it's wise for all bands that can afford it to secure their independence and freedom as much as possible. It's taken us nearly 16 years to do this, but it has been one of the best decisions we've ever made. Agalloch has always been very focused on every aspect of a release and with Faustian Echoes we now have full control.

Pitchfork: It's been two years since Marrow of the Spirit. Do you have another full-length in the works?

DA: We have sketches, riffs, and plenty of ideas.

JH: This EP was a nice study of how we should approach the writing and recording of the next full-length. It provided an excellent opportunity to try out a new studio, a new engineer, a completely new writing approach, and I think the result speaks for itself.

Pitchfork: Marrow was your highest profile album to date in the sense of some crossover and "mainstream" attention. What was that like? It's interesting to me that you'd follow that moment up with a 21-minute song.

DA: Mainstream attention is perfectly fine as long as the music, image, ideas, and artistic integrity are never compromised. You can say whatever you want about the production of Marrow, but we did what we wanted with the music and recording. It doesn't sound like a modern metal album with triggered drums, vocal correction, and all those things that I feel are sadly compromising music today. This is an approach we plan to continue with for the next full length. There wasn't really any attention paid to what it would mean to follow up Marrow with a single 21-minute song. The decision was almost as easy as: let's do an EP with just one long song recorded live in the studio.

Pitchfork: You guys have been around for more than 15 years. What are your thoughts on the "post-black metal" tag? Extreme music is clearly in a very different place now than it was in 1995.

DA: Much like the changes that death metal underwent when the second wave of black metal was just getting started (I'm thinking of bands like Atheist, Death, and Cynic and later Gorguts), I suppose it would only be natural that black metal would grow and develop over time as well. I think "post-black metal"-- which really only implies that "something had changed after the Norwegian sound reached its potential"-- started with Ved Buens Ende, but really seemed to cohere with Arcturus' La Masquerade Infernale. That was the first record where I said, ok, black metal is starting to incorporate other influences. Now we have really incredible bands that are doing interesting things like Deathspell Omega, Blut Aus Nord, and the later Abigor albums. I don't see Agalloch as being similar to those bands, but I do like to think we share a desire to stretch and contribute to what was the initial "Norwegian sound" of the early 90s. Whether you put a prefix in front of black metal or not, obviously it needed to grow if it were going to last this long.

Pitchfork: The press release announcing your summer tour quotes Kerouac's On the Road. Has literature been something you've always looked toward for your songwriting/inspiration?

DA: Yes. German literature aside for now, the references to American literature and our use of images of local scenery were very deliberate even early on in our history. In reference to the previous question, we all felt another way to differentiate ourselves from the black metal of the early 90s was to not gaze longingly at the "old world." American black metal bands in the mid-90s were quoting Nietzsche and using obscure imagery that all seemed very European. Having grown up in the Northwest and on the Columbia River Gorge, I saw nothing that couldn't easily compete with the images of Norwegian landscapes on so many black metal albums. So, we wanted to be American and although our sound is clearly influenced by European bands, we felt it disingenuous to not at least be American when it came to imagery and ideas. Even "marrow of the spirit" is a slightly altered phrase from Thoreau's Walden. Although an obvious choice, when I wanted to offer a meaningful quote regarding our American tour, it only felt right to cite a favorite passage from On the Road.

Pitchfork: Can you talk a bit about that tour? You're playing longer sets. And you hand-picked local acts. It's not the typical summer trek.

DA: We try to do everything on our own terms. We want each show to be special and this means having local or supporting acts that share some connection with what we're doing and that we can stand by and agree our doing interesting things musically. I always hated seeing a band where the promoter had arbitrarily tacked on four death metal bands that seemed grossly out of place. I think our fans appreciate this. I realize this can be interpreted as not supporting locals scenes-- but our shows our not about local scenes, they are for the fans. And we take as much care in a show as we do our songwriting and packaging.

JH: It is sometimes difficult to maintain this, especially in markets where we have not played before and the promoters don't want to risk not having some local support. We've had to compromise from time to time...